---
title: The Bad Plus
subtitle: A jazz trio you might be able to love even if you hate jazz
layout: post
categories: ["Music I Listen To While Working"]
---

I've found over the years that there is some music that is well-suited for listening while doing software-development related work and some music is not. Rather than try to derive a special formula for "coding music" I'm going to tell you about some music that works for me. One group I've been listening to for awhile that works particularly well is *The Bad Plus*.

*The Bad Plus* is a jazz piano trio that might not sound like a jazz group to you at first blush. They employ jazz idioms and instrumentation on popular cover tunes and their own originals as well. I find a wide range of mood and tone in their music: calm and nearly ambient, cacophonic excitement, and even straight ahead tunes with lots of energy. Despite the diversity it all works nicely when I'm clacking away on the keyboard.

I highly recommend catching them live if they are ever playing in your town. The occasions I'm which I had the priviledge of hearing The Bad Plus did not disappoint -- YouTube has a nice selection of live recordings available. One can only hope they release more live music in the future.

## Song Selection for Work

* Anthem for the Earnest
* Flim
* As the Moment Slips Away
* Beauty Has It Hard
* We are the Champions
* Forces
* Prehensile Dream
* Silence is the Question
* 1983 Regional All-Star
* [Newport Jazz Festival, 2006](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cQNybpWVS3o)
* [Moers Festival, 2017](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=11YQwpNM1ng)

